---
layout: post
title:  "High School Coursework For College"
date:   2024-02-19 00:00:00 -0500
categories: College Applications
---

Here's my hot take on structuring your high school classes for college applications: It doesn't matter what major you're planning to study; colleges want to see you maximize the rigor with whatever courses your school offers.

Now I formulated this after advising students of both non-STEM & STEM major plans: a hot topic of debate was whether non-STEM majors should still push themselves to take rigorous classes like AP Calculus BC and AP Physics instead of less rigorous STEM classes like AP Calculus AB & AP Environmental Science (analogously, this applied for STEM majors and rigorous social science/humanities classes). In the past, my advising wasn't consistent and was quite situational, but now I universally suggest if one can/has the time & effort to dedicate to, take the former, more rigorous option. Here's why:
1. Colleges are looking at your extracurricular activities to see your "spike" (a college app term for an app's focus on a specific major/subject area). They are looking at your coursework and class rigor to see if you're a strong student and can survive the needs of a tough college curriculum (this is because if courses were used to show one's "spike", everyone would be very similar due to general education requirements in HS leaving few other electives for specialization; meanwhile, extracurricular activities can really set students apart). By "spiking" in your coursework, you reduce your overall class rigor which isn't looked upon favorably (however, this is only worth it if with the reduced course load, time is reused for a valuable purpose like advancing an extracurricular activity; however, this is a unique scenario and should be disregarded in most cases as coursework/rigor are college's first major application filter). Furthermore, "spiking" with classes isn't even viable as most HS classes aren't in-depth enough to be considered as a "spike". For instance, while AP Physics C: Mechanics will teach the fundamentals of physics/dynamics for someone trying to enter engineering, an extracurricular activity like a robotics club/team will provide significantly more practical skills, depth, knowledge, & work products. Restated, classes aren't technical enough to be considered a form of "specialization" to show interest in one's planned major.
2. At most high schools, the most rigorous classes (typically AP, IB, or Dual Enrollment) satisfy only primary general education requirements at most colleges, regardless of major. This is a continuation from the end of the last point that the most rigorous HS classes aren't "in-depth" enough for indicating interest in the major: as long as you go to college you will likely have to take some form of those classes anyways as general education requirements. As a result, colleges favor students who can complete the most of those classes/the most rigorous ones earlier. These students also come in with the most transferred credit hours regardless of major, which sets them up nicely for their college future and indicates to admissions officers they will have success in college classes and have more time/energy for success outside classes (i.e. internships, research, clubs/competitions, etc.)
3. Here, I'm going to open the curtain on the major assumption I've made: your school even offers this many high-level classes. Because while I was fortunate to go to a school with a fairly comprehensive AP and DE program, most schools in America don't have such support. As a result, let's reframe this scenario from the situation of a student at a school with a limited number of advanced classes: regardless of the alignment with their intended major/the class focus, the student is likely to take all of the offered classes and "max out" their curriculum to show colleges they are ready for the more rigorous studies in their future. This principle doesn't change if your school has more resources (i.e. more advanced classes offered): again, the primary goal of taking these classes is to show you can handle course rigor, not to show your interest in economics, history, psychology, or any other subject through taking 1 AP class and degrading AP Calculus BC to AB or AP Biology to AP Environmental Science. And this applies to STEM majors too in not taking advanced level social science/humanities classes because they aren't aligned with their major. In the end, it doesn't matter because those classes are all general education requirements in college and are meant to show whether you can handle tough classes, not what your interests are.

